### 17.3 The Discrete and Fast Fourier Transforms

As you saw in Chapter 7, the Fourier transform is one of the most important tools for solving boundary value problems. Computing a Fourier transform requires knowing a function on a continuous set of values. However, in practical applications, a function is measured on a discrete set of values, and for that reason it is important to know how to solve problems and compute Fourier transforms from just the knowledge of a discrete set of measurements. In Section 17.1 we learned about the sampling theorem, which enables us to reconstruct functions and their Fourier transforms from our knowledge of a discrete set of sampled values. These techniques apply for band-limited functions and can be used to approximate more general functions. In this section we will develop new tools for computing Fourier transforms from sampled values. These tools are based on the so-called discrete Fourier transform (DFT). Not only can this transform be applied to a wide range of functions, but there is a very efficient algorithm, known as the fast Fourier transform (FFT), for computing it. Because of this successful numerical algorithm, the DFT is the most commonly used method for approximating Fourier transforms.

As a transform that acts on sequences, the DFT has many interesting propertics similar to those of the Fourier transform. In exploring them, it will help to recall in your mind the corresponding properties of the Fourier transform.

## The Discrete Fourier Transform

We will denote a finite sequence of $N$ real or complex numbers, or an $N$ sequence, by

$$
x=(x(j))_{j=0}^{N-1}=(x(0), x(1), \ldots, x(N-1)) .
$$

We think of this as a function over the discrete domain $\{0,1, \ldots, N-1\}$.

## Basic Operations on Sequences

If $x$ and $y$ are two sequences, we define their sum $x+y$, respectively, their product, $x y$, by

$$
(x+y)(j)=x(j)+y(j),
$$

respectively,

$$
x y(j)=x(j) y(j)
$$

Also, if $x$ is a sequence and $a$ is a number, then by $a x$ we mean the sequence whose $j$ th term is $a x(j)$. We now come to a fundamental definition.

## DISCRETE FOURIER TRANSFORM

Caution: Our definition of the DFT may differ from others found in the literature.

Given an $N$-sequence $x=(x(0), x(1), \ldots, x(N-1))$, we define the $N$-point discrete Fourier transform of $x$, abbreviated DFT, by
(1) $\quad X(k)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j=0}^{N-1} x(j) e^{2 \pi i j \frac{k}{N}}, \quad k=0,1, \ldots, N-1$.

Thus the DFT of an $N$-sequence $x$ is another $N$-sequence of complex numbers $X=(X(0), X(1) \ldots X(N-1))$. We will also use the notation $X=\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)$.

Note the similarity with the definition of the Fourier transform. Here we multiply the values of the sequence by a complex exponential and then sum over the whole domain of the sequence. With the Fourier transform, we multiply the function by a complex exponential and integrate over the whole domain of the function. In fact, you will see that many properties of the Fourier transform will be translated to properties of the DFT by an appropriate conversion involving changing an integral over a continuous domain to a sum over a discrete domain.

## EXAMPLE 1 Computing a DFT

To compute the (4-point) DFT of $x=(0,1,1,-1)$, we appeal to (1) and write the four terms of the DFT as

$$
\mathcal{F}_{4}(x)(h)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{4}} \sum_{j=0}^{3} x:(j) e^{2 \pi i j \frac{k}{4}}, \quad k=0,1,2,3 .
$$

Replacing $x(j)$ by its value, we get for the first term

$$
\mathcal{F}_{4}(x)(0)=\frac{1}{2} \sum_{j=0}^{3} x(j)=\frac{1}{2}(0+1+1+(-1))=\frac{1}{2} .
$$

For the second term we have

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal{F}_{1}(x)(1) & =\frac{1}{2} \sum_{j=0}^{3} r(j) e^{i \frac{j \pi}{2}}=\frac{1}{2}\left(0+e^{i \frac{\pi}{2}}+e^{i \pi}-e^{i \frac{3 \pi}{2}}\right) \\
& =\frac{1}{2}\left(\cos \frac{\pi}{2}+i \sin \frac{\pi}{2}+\cos \pi+i \sin \pi \cdots \cos \frac{3 \pi}{2}-i \sin \frac{3 \pi}{2}\right) \\
& =-\frac{1}{2}+i
\end{aligned}
$$

Similarly, we have

$$
\mathcal{F}_{4}(x)(2)=\frac{1}{2} \quad \text { and } \quad \mathcal{F}_{4}(x)(3)=-\frac{1}{2}-i
$$

Thus the DFT of $x=(0,1,1,-1)$ is $X=\left(\frac{1}{2},-\frac{1}{2}+i, \frac{1}{2} .-\frac{1}{2}-i\right)$.

## INVERSE DISCRETE FOURIER TRANSFORM

THEOREM 1 INVERSION OF THE DFT

Like other transforms that we have encountered previously, the DFT has an inverse, known as the inverse discrete Fourier transform (IDFT), given by
(2) $\quad \mathcal{F}_{N}^{\prime}(X)(k)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j=0}^{N-1} X(j) e^{-2 \pi i j \frac{k}{N}}, \quad k=0,1, \ldots N-1$.

Thus the IDFT of an $N$-sequence is another $N$-sequence. Note the similarity between the two definitions (1) and (2). As you would expect, the effect of the inverse transform is to give you back your original sequence. This is expressed in the following theorem whose proof is presented in the appendix at the end of the section.

For any $N$-sequence $x$ we have

$$
\mathcal{F}_{N}^{-1}\left(\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)\right)(k)=x(k), \quad k=0,1, \ldots, N-1
$$

As an immediate consequence we get the uniqueness property of the DFT, which states that if $x$ and $y$ are two $N$-sequences such that $X=Y$, then $x=y$.

## EXAMPLE 2 Computing an IDFT

Let $X$ denote the DFT in Example 1. Verify Theorem 1 by computing the IDFT of $X$, using (2).

Solution Applying (2) with $X=\left(\frac{1}{2},-\frac{1}{2}+i, \frac{1}{2},-\frac{1}{2}-i\right)$, we get

$$
\mathcal{F}_{k}^{-1}(X)(k)=\frac{1}{2} \sum_{j=0}^{3} X(j) e^{-2 \pi i j \frac{k}{4}}, \quad k=0,1,2.3
$$

Garrying out the necessary operations and simplifying, we find

$$
\begin{aligned}
& \mathcal{F}_{4}^{-1}(X)(0)=\frac{1}{2} \sum_{j=0}^{3} X(j)=0=x(0) \\
\mathcal{F}_{4}^{-1}(X)(1)= & \frac{1}{2} \sum_{j=0}^{3} X(j) e^{-i \frac{j \pi}{2}} \\
= & \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{1}{2}+\left(-\frac{1}{2}+i\right) e^{-i \frac{\pi}{2}}+\frac{1}{2} e^{-\pi i}+\left(-\frac{1}{2}-i\right) e^{-i \frac{3 \pi}{2}}\right) \\
= & \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{1}{2}+\left(-\frac{1}{2}+i\right)(-i)+\frac{1}{2}(-1)+\left(-\frac{1}{2}-i\right) i\right) \\
= & \mathbf{1}=x(1)
\end{aligned}
$$

Similarly, we find that

$$
\mathcal{F}_{4}^{-1}(X)(2)=1=x(2) \quad \text { and } \quad \mathcal{F}_{4}^{\prime}(X)(3)=-1=x(3) .
$$

Thus, as asserted by Theorem 1, we have $\mathcal{F}_{4}^{-1}(X)=\mathcal{F}_{4}^{-1}\left(\mathcal{F}_{4}(x)\right)=x$.

## Operational Properties

As you would expect from transforms, the DFT and IDFT are both linear. That is, if $a$ and $b$ are complex numbers and $x$ and $y$ are $N$-sequences, then

$$
\mathcal{F}_{N}(a x+b y)=a \mathcal{F}_{N}(x)+b \mathcal{F}_{N}(y)
$$

and

$$
\mathcal{F}_{N}^{-1}(a x+b y)=a \mathcal{F}_{N}^{-1}(x)+b \mathcal{F}_{N}^{-1}(y)
$$

The next property deals with the issue of periodicity of the DFT. When we defined the DFT in (1), we restricted $k$ to be an integer in the set $\{0,1,2, \ldots, N-1\}$. This restriction allowed us to think of the DFT of an $N$-sequence as another $N$-sequence. What would happen if we allowed $k$ to be any integer? To answer this question, remember that the complex exponential function $c^{2}$ is $2 \pi i$-periodic, and so

$$
e^{2 \pi i j \frac{k+N}{N}}=e^{2 \pi i j \frac{k}{N}+2 \pi i j}=e^{2 \pi i j \frac{k}{N}} e^{2 \pi i j}=e^{2 \pi i j \frac{k}{N}} .
$$

Substituting this in (1), we find that

$$
X(k)=X(k+N)
$$

and hence the DFT is periodic with period $N$. A similar argument shows that the IDFT is periodic with period $N$. You should keep in mind that the notion of periodicity applies only when you evaluate (1) and (2) at all integers $k$, and not just $k=0,1,2, \ldots, N-1$.

In what follows we shall identify a finite $N$-sequence with the infinite sequence obtained from it by $N$-periodic extension. That is, given an $N$ sequence $x(k), k=0,1, \ldots, N-1$, we construct an infinite $N$-periodic sequence by defining $x(k+N)=x(k)$. We use the same notation for both finite and infinite sequences without comment.

Given two $N$-sequences $x$ and $y$, with both viewed as $N$-periodic sequences on the integers, we can define their convolution by

$$
x * y(k)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j=0}^{N-1} x(j) y(k-j) . \quad k=0,1, \ldots N-1
$$

Since $x$ and $y$ are periodic with period $N$, it follows that $x * y$ is also $N$ periodic. Using Theorem 2 below, it can be shown that convolution is commutative, associative, and distributive over addition (see Exercise 7). As expected from a convolution, we have the following crucial property.

THEOREM 2 TRANSFORMS OF CONVOLUTIONS

For any two $N$-sequences $x$ and $y$ we have

$$
\mathcal{F}_{N}(x * y)=\mathcal{F}_{N}(x) \mathcal{F}_{N}(y),
$$

and

$$
\mathcal{F}_{N}^{-1}(X Y)=x * y
$$

Proof Note that the second equality is a consequence of the first one and uniqueness of the DFT. To prove the first equality we use (1) and (4), and we get, after interchanging sums,

$$
\mathcal{F}_{N}(x * y)(k)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{l=0}^{N-1} x(l) \frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j=0}^{N-1} y(j-l) e^{2 \pi i j \frac{k}{N}} .
$$

Shifting the index of summation in the inner sum, we get

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal{F}_{N}(x * y)(k) & =\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{l=0}^{N-1} x(l) \frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j=-l}^{N-l-1} y(j) e^{2 \pi i(j+l) \frac{k}{N}} \\
& =\overbrace{\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{l=0}^{N-1} x(l) e^{2 \pi i l \frac{k}{N}}}^{X(k)} \overbrace{\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j=0}^{N-1} y(j) \epsilon^{2 \pi i j \frac{k}{N}}}^{Y(k)} \\
& =X(k) Y(k)
\end{aligned}
$$

which proves the theorem.
Theorem 2 can be used to compute convolutions, as we illustrate in the following example.

## EXAMPLE 3 Convolution of sequences

Let $x=(1,1,1,2)$ and $y=(-1,1,3,-2)$. Find $x * y$.
Solution We first compute the DFT's $X$ and $Y$ with the help of a computer:

$$
X=(2.5,-0.5 i,-0.5,0.5 i) \quad \text { and } \quad Y=(0.5,-2+1.5 i, 1.5,-2-1.5 i)
$$

Thus $X Y^{\prime}=(1.25,0.75+i,-0.75,0.75-i)$ and so with the help of a computer again to compute the IDFT, we find

$$
x * y=\mathcal{F}_{4}^{-1}(X Y)=(1,2,-.5,0)
$$

## The Fast Fourier Transform

The fast Fourier transform (FFT) is an efficient algorithm for computing the discrete Fourier transform. It was discovered in 1965 by J. W. Tukey and J. W. Cooley and is considered one of the century's most important contributions to numerical analysis. To describe this algorithm, let $x= \left(x_{0} \cdot x_{1}, \ldots, x_{\Lambda \cdot 1}\right)$ be an $N$-sequence of complex numbers. Its $\mathrm{DF} \Gamma$ is given by (1):

$$
X(k)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j=0}^{N-1} x(j) e^{2 \pi i j \frac{\hbar}{\bar{V}}}, \quad k=0,1, \ldots, N-1 .
$$

We shall be interested in comparing numbers of operations that are required to perform a DFT. Let us define an elementary operation to be a multiplication of two complex numbers followed by the addition of two complex numbers. It is clear that computing $X(k)$ in the way suggested by (1) requires $N$ elementary operations, and since there are $N$ such numbers, we need $N^{2}$ elementary operations to compute the $N$-sequence $X$. If $N$ is a prime number, there is not much that we can do. But if $N$ is a composite number, say

$$
\Lambda=N_{1} \cdot V_{2},
$$

then we will show that we can compute the DFT by performing $N\left(N_{1}+N_{2}\right)$ operations. Before we delve into the technicalities of the FFT algorithm, we discuss how it is usually applied. The same proof that we will present shows that if $N=N_{1} N_{2} N_{3}$, then the DFT can be computed by performing $N\left(N_{1}+N_{2}+N_{3}\right)$ elementary operations, and so on. To maximize the savings using the FFT, in practice, we would choose $N=2^{\nu}$. Then the number of elementary operations required to compute the DFT becomes

$$
N \underbrace{(2+2+\cdots+2)}_{\nu \text { times }}=2 \nu N=2 N \ln _{2} N .
$$

When compared to $N^{2}$, the number of operations required to compute $X$ in the most straightforward way, we see that, for large $N$, the savings from using the FFT are enormous.

We now explain the ideas behind the FFT for the case when $N=N_{1} N_{2}$. For $j, k=0,1,2, \ldots, N-1$, use long division to write

$$
j=j_{1} N_{1}+j_{2}, \quad \text { and } \quad k=k_{1} N_{2}+k_{2} .
$$

where $j_{2}$ and $k_{1}$ range from 0 to $N_{1}-1$, and $j_{1}$ and $k_{2}$ range from 0 to $N_{2}-1$. Then

$$
\begin{aligned}
e^{2 \pi i j k / N} & =e^{2 \pi i\left(j_{1} N_{1}+j_{2}\right)\left(k_{1} N_{2}+k_{2}\right) / N} \\
& =e^{2 \pi i\left(j_{1} k_{1}+j_{1} k_{2} / N_{2}+k_{1} j_{2} / N_{1}+j_{2} k_{2} / N\right)} \\
& =e^{2 \pi i\left(j_{1} k_{2} / N_{2}+k_{1} j_{2} / N_{1}+j_{2} k_{2} / N\right)},
\end{aligned}
$$

because $e^{2 \pi i j_{1} k_{1}}=1$. Putting this in (1), we find that

$$
X(k)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j=0}^{N-1} x(j) e^{2 \pi i\left(j_{1} k_{2} / N_{2}+k_{1} j_{2} / N_{1}+j_{2} k_{2} / N\right)}
$$

Now summing over all the $j=0,1, \ldots, N-1$ is the same thing as summing over all $j_{1}=0,1, \ldots, N_{2}-1$ and all $j_{2}=0,1, \ldots, N_{1}-1$. Thus,

$$
\begin{aligned}
X(k) & =\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j_{2}=0}^{N_{1}-1} e^{2 \pi i\left(k_{1} j_{2} / N_{1}+j_{2} k_{2} / N\right)} \sum_{j_{1}=0}^{N_{2}-1} x\left(j_{1} N_{1}+j_{2}\right) e^{2 \pi i j_{1} k_{2} / N_{2}} \\
& =\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j_{2}=0}^{N_{1}-1} e^{2 \pi i\left(k_{1} j_{2} / N_{1}+j_{2} k_{2} / N\right)} C\left(j_{2}, k_{2}\right)
\end{aligned}
$$

where

$$
C\left(j_{2}, k_{2}\right)=\sum_{j_{\mathrm{I}}=0}^{N_{2}-1} x\left(j_{1} N_{1}+j_{2}\right) e^{2 \pi i j_{1} k_{2} / N_{2}}
$$

We are now ready to count the number of elementary operations required to compute all the $X(k)$ 's. The most important step is to observe that each $C\left(j_{2}, k_{2}\right)$ appears in the computation of $X(k)$ for $N_{1}$ different $k$ 's, namely, $k=k_{2}, N_{2}+k_{2}, 2 N_{2}+k_{2}, \ldots,\left(N_{1}-1\right) N_{2}+k_{2}$. Each $C\left(j_{2}, k_{2}\right)$ requires $N_{2}$ elementary operations. Since there are $N C\left(j_{2}, k_{2}\right)$ (recall that $0 \leq j_{2} \leq N_{1}-1,0 \leq k_{2} \leq N_{2}-1$ ), we need $N N_{2}$ operations to compute all of them. Having computed all the $C\left(j_{2}, k_{2}\right)$, we use them in (5) to compute the $X(k)$ 's. From (5), it takes $N_{1}$ operations to compute $X(k)$. Since there are $N$ of them, we need $N N_{1}$ operations. Hence the total number of operations

$$
N N_{2}+N N_{1}=N\left(N_{1}+N_{2}\right)
$$

as claimed.

## Appendix: Proof of Theorem 1

We start by establishing an interesting identity. For $j, k=0,1.2, \ldots, N-1$, we have

$$
\sum_{n=0}^{N-1} e^{2 \sin \frac{j-k}{N}}= \begin{cases}0 & \text { if } j \neq k \\ N & \text { if } j=k\end{cases}
$$

Note that the second part of the identity is obvious, since if $j=k$, each term in the sum is 1 , and so the total sum is $N$. To prove the first part, we write

$$
e^{2 \pi i n \frac{i-k}{N}}=z^{n}
$$

where $z=e^{2 \pi i \frac{i-k}{N}}$. With this notation, it becomes clear that the sum in (6) is a gcometric sum which equals $\frac{1-z^{N}}{1-z}$. Since $z^{N}=e^{2 \pi i(j-k)}=1$, it follows that the
sum is 0 as claimed (note that for $j \neq k, z \neq 1$ ). With (6) in hand, the proof of Theorem 1 becomes straightforward. Using (1) and (2), we get

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal{F}_{N}^{-1}\left(\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)\right)(k) & =\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{n=0}^{N-1} \overbrace{\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j=0}^{N-1} x(j) e^{2 \pi i j \frac{n}{N}}}^{X(n)} e^{-2 \pi i n \frac{k}{N}} \\
& =\frac{1}{N} \sum_{j=0}^{N-1} x(j) \sum_{n=0}^{N-1} e^{2 \pi i(j-k) \frac{n}{N}} .
\end{aligned}
$$

By (6), the imer sum is zero unless $j=k$, in which case the sum is $N$. Thus

$$
\mathcal{F}_{N}^{-1}\left(\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)\right)(k)=\frac{1}{N} x(k) N=x(k)
$$

which completes the proof.

## Exercises 10.3

1. Let $x=(1,2,3)$ and $y=(4,-1,0)$. Compute (a) $x+y$, (b) $x-2 y$, (c) $x y$, (d) $x(x+y)$, (e) $X$, (f) $Y$.
2. Compute $\mathcal{F}_{3} x$ and $\mathcal{F}_{3}^{-1} x$ for the given $x$.
(a) $x=(0,1,1)$.
(b) $x=(-1,0,1)$.
(c) $x=(-1,1,2)$.
[Hint: For (c), use your results from (a) and (b).]
In Exercises 3-4, compute $X, Y$, and $x * y$, using the method of Example 3.
3. $x=(1,2,0,1), y=(1,1,1,1)$.
4. $x=(0,0,1,-1), y=(1,2,-1,1)$.
5. Compute $x * y(0)$ and $x * y(1)$ directly from (4), where $x$ and $y$ are as in Exercise
6. [Hint: Extend $y$ periodically before you carry out the computation.]
7. Let $x$ and $y$ be as in Exercise 1. Show that $x * y=y * x$ by computing the convolutions using (1).
8. Use Theorem 2 to show that for any $N$-sequences $x, y, z$, we have $x * y=y * x$, $x *(y * z)=(x * y) * z$, and $x *(y+z)=x * y+x * z$.
9. Use the method of Example 3 to compute $x * y, y * x, x * y * z$, where $x, y$ are as in Exercise 3 and $z=(\mathbf{1},-\mathbf{1}, 0,0)$.
10. Let $\epsilon$ denote the $N$-sequence in which the first term is $\sqrt{N}$ and all the other terms are 0 .
(a) Show that $\mathcal{F}_{N}(\epsilon)(k)=1$ for all $k$.
(b) Conclude from (a) that $\epsilon * x=x$ for all $N$-sequences $x$. Thus $\epsilon$ is the unit for the operation of convolution for $N$-sequences.

## 10. Sums of periodic sequences.

(a) Suppose that $(f(n))_{n=-\infty}^{\infty}$ is an $N$-periodic sequence. Show that for any $l$

$$
\sum_{n=0}^{N-1} f(n)=\sum_{n=1}^{N+1-1} f(n) .
$$

Thus the sum of any $N$ consecutive terms of an $N$-periodic sequence is constant. This result is the analog of Theorem 1, Section 2.1. To prove it, mimic the proof outlined in Exercise 18, Section 2.1.
(b) Conclude from (a) that for any $N$-sequence $y$, we have

$$
Y(k)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}} \sum_{j=-1}^{N-1-1} y(j) e^{2 \pi i j \frac{k}{N}}
$$

[Hint: Remember that $y$ is $N$-periodic and show that $\left(e^{2 \pi i j \frac{k}{N}}\right)_{j=-\infty}^{\infty}$ is also $N$ periodic.]
11. Let $x$ be an $N$-sequence and $k$ an integer. Establish the following properties of the DFT and its inverse. Assume $x$ is real-valued in parts (a) and (d).
(a) $\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)(k)=\overline{\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)(-k)}$.
(b) $\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)(-k)=\mathcal{F}_{N}^{-1}(x)\left(h_{i}\right)$.
(c) $\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)(-k)=\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)(N-k)$.
(d) $\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)(N-k)=\overline{\mathcal{F}_{N}(x)(k)}$.
