

In this section we describe a method for constructing one-to-one analytic mappings of the upper half-plane onto polygonal regions. We start by setting the notation.

Suppose that $\Omega$ is a region in the $w$-plane, bounded by a positively oriented polygonal path $P$ with $n$ sides. Let $w_1, w_2, \ldots, w_n$ denote the vertices of $P$, counted consecutively as we trace the path through its positive orientation (see Figure 1, where $n=5$ ). If $P$ is bounded, then the point $w_n$ is taken to be the initial and terminal point of the closed path $P$. If $P$ is unbounded, we take $w_n=\infty$ and think of $P$ as a polygon with $n-1$ vertices $w_1, w_2, \ldots, w_{n-1}$ (Figure 2). It will be convenient to measure the exterior angle at a vertex, and so we let $\theta_j$ denote the angle that we make as we turn the corner of the polygon at $w_j$. We choose $0<\left|\theta_j\right|<\pi(j=1, \ldots, n)$; a positive value corresponds to a left turn and a negative value corresponds to a right turn. In Figure 1, $\theta_2$ is negative while all other $\theta_j$ are positive.



> [!theorem] Schwarz-Christoffel Transformation
> Let $\Omega$ be a region bounded by a polygonal path $P$ with vertices at $w_j$ (counted consecutively) and corresponding exterior angles $\theta_j$. Then there is a one-to-one conformal mapping $f(z)$ of the upper half-plane onto $\Omega$, such that
> 
> $$
> f^{\prime}(z)=A\left(z-x_1\right)^{-\frac{\theta_1}{\pi}}\left(z-x_2\right)^{-\frac{\theta_2}{\pi}} \cdots\left(z-x_{n-1}\right)^{-\frac{\theta_{n-1}}{\pi}},
> $$
> 
> where the $x_j$ 's are real, $x_1<x_2<\cdots<x_{n-1}, f\left(x_j\right)=w_j, \lim _{z \rightarrow \infty} f(z)= w_n, A$ is a constant, and principal branches are used to define the powers.


The points $x_j(j=1, \ldots, n-1)$ on the $x$-axis are the pre-images of the vertices of the polygonal path $P$ in the $w$-plane. Two of the $x_j$ 's may be chosen arbitrarily, so long as they are arranged in ascending order. We can express the fact that $\lim _{z \rightarrow \infty} f(z)=w_n$ by writing $f(\infty)=w_n$. In the case of an unbounded polygon $P$, we have $f(\infty)=\infty$.

The mapping $f(z)$ is called a Schwarz-Christoffel transformation, after the German mathematicians Herman Amandus Schwarz (1843-1921) and Elwin Bruno Christoffel (1829-1900). Since $f(z)$ is an antiderivative of (1), we can write

$$
f(z)=A \int\left(z-x_1\right)^{-\frac{\theta_1}{\tau}}\left(z-x_2\right)^{-\frac{\theta_2}{n}} \cdots\left(z-x_{n-1}\right)^{-\frac{\theta_{n-1}}{n}} d z+B
$$


The constants $A$ and $B$ depend on the size and location of the polygonal path $P$. The full proof of Theorem 1 is quite complicated. We only sketch a part that illustrates the ideas behind the construction of the transformation.
Sketch of Proof of Theorem 1. Consider a mapping $f(z)$ whose derivative is given by (1) and let $w_j$ denote the image of $x_j$, where $x_1<x_2<\cdots<x_{n-1}$

