## Topics to Review

In studying this chapter, it will help to keep in mind some specific examples of orthogonal functions and their associated expansion theory. For example, you might use Fourier series or Bessel expansions as your basis for comparison. Sections 6.1, 6.2, and 6.4 are self-contained. Sections 14.1 and 14.2 develop the general subject of Sturn-Liouville theory for boundary value problems associated with second order linear ordinary differential equations. Section 14.4 develops a corresponding theory for certain fourth-order problems. In Sections 14.3 and 14.5 we look at specific classical applications of the second and fourth-order theories, respectively.

## Looking Ahead...

The applications in this chapter are some of the most beautiful in physics and engineering. They put together different theories and use almost all our knowledge of special series expansions. Even though these applications are all classical, they are presented in a way that invites the use of computers. For example, in the hanging chain problem (Section 14.3), the solution is carried out to a point where it can be fed into a computer to generate pictures that simulate the motion of the hanging chain. The computer can be used in a similar way to illustrate the new expansion results arising in SturmLiouville theory, especially the complicated fourth-order expansions and their related applications to the elastic vibrations of beams (Sections 6.4, 6.5).

## 14

## STURM-LIOUVILLE THEORY WITH ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS

It is not once nor twice but times without number that the same ideas make their appearance in the world.
-ARISTOTLE

In the previous chapters you may have noticed a common theme in the solutions of the various boundary value problems. In each case, after separating variables, we had to solve a boundary value problem for an ordinary differential equation. Although the equations were often different, their solutions shared the common properties of being orthogonal and of having expansion theorems. We were then able to express an arbitrary function in a series in terms of these special orthogonal solutions. In this way, we encountered Legendre, Bessel, Fourier, and other related expansions. Are these expansions isolated theories that happened to share common properties, or are they part of a general theory that unifies them all?

The main focus of this chapter is to develop a general theory that encompasses all the specific expansion theorems considered previously, including Fourier, Fourier sine, Fourier cosine, Bessel, and Legendre expansions. This theory is named after Sturm and Liouville, who developed it in the early part of the nineteenth century in their studies of heat conduction problems, not long after the ground-breaking work of Fourier.

Beyond its esthetic appeal, Sturm-Liouville theory has many applications in applied mathematics, physics, and engineering. We will use it to obtain further expansion results rather than developing them on a case-by-case basis. Several classical applications are presented in this chapter, including the problems of the hanging chain (Section 14.3), the vibrating beam (Section 14.5), and the theory of plates and the biharmonic operator (Sections 14.6-14.7).

### 14.1 Orthogonal Functions

You may recall from your first course in differential equations how certain notions from linear algebra were crucial in studying solutions of differential equations. For example, to check whether two solutions of a second order linear differential equation yield the general solution, it is enough to show that the determinant of a certain matrix (the Wronskian) is nonzero (see Appendix A.1). These and other notions, such as linear independence and basis, contributed in an essential way to our understanding of solutions of differential equations. Similarly, our development of the theory of Sturm-Liouville in this chapter will require notions from linear algebra that are somewhat abstract but simple to explain in the context of a finite-dimensional vector space. For this reason, we start our discussion by reviewing some basic concepts from linear algebra, specialized to vectors in three dimensions.

Recall that the inner product of two vectors $\boldsymbol{x}=\left(x_{1}, x_{2}, x_{3}\right)$ and $\boldsymbol{y}=\left(y_{1}, y_{2}, y_{3}\right)$ is the number $\boldsymbol{x} \cdot \boldsymbol{y}=(\boldsymbol{x}, \boldsymbol{y})=x_{1} y_{1}+x_{2} y_{2}+x_{3} y_{3}$. Two nonzero vectors $\boldsymbol{x}$ and $\boldsymbol{y}$ are said to be orthogonal if $\boldsymbol{x} \cdot \boldsymbol{y}=0$. A set of nonzero vectors is said to be orthogonal if any two distinct vectors from this set are orthogonal. A simple example of an orthogonal set consists of the vectors $\boldsymbol{e}_{1}=(1,0,0), \boldsymbol{e}_{2}=(0,1,0)$, and $\boldsymbol{e}_{3}=(0,0,1)$. The inner product is also used to define the norm of a vector $\boldsymbol{v}$ by

$$
\|\boldsymbol{v}\|=\sqrt{(\boldsymbol{v}, \boldsymbol{v})}=\left(\sum_{j=1}^{3} v_{j}^{2}\right)^{1 / 2} .
$$

Here are two properties of the set $\left\{\boldsymbol{e}_{1}, \boldsymbol{e}_{2}, \boldsymbol{e}_{3}\right\}$ that we wish to investigate for sets of functions:

- The set $\left\{\boldsymbol{e}_{1}, \boldsymbol{e}_{2}, \boldsymbol{e}_{3}\right\}$ is complete. That is, if $\boldsymbol{v}$ is a vector that is orthogonal to $e_{1}, e_{2}$, and $e_{3}$ then $v=0$.
- The set $\left\{e_{1}, e_{2}, e_{3}\right\}$ is a generating set. That is, every vector $\boldsymbol{v}= \left(v_{1}, v_{2}, v_{3}\right)$ can be written as

$$
v=\sum_{j=1}^{3}\left(v, e_{j}\right) e_{j}
$$

## Inner Products and Orthogonality of Functions

In defining the inner product of two vectors, we summed the products of their components. To define the inner product of two functions, we will integrate their product as follows. Let $f$ and $g$ be real-valued functions defined on an interval $(a, b)$ (the interval may be infinite). The inner product of $f$ and $g$, denoted $(f, g)$, is the number

If $f$ and $g$ are complex-valued, then define

$$
(f, g)=\int_{a}^{b} f(x) \overline{g(x)} d x
$$

ORTHOGONAL FUNCTIONS

In the definitions of orthogonality and norm, you should use the appropriate definition of ( $f, g$ ) for complex-valued functions.

$$
(f, g)=\int_{a}^{b} f(x) g(x) d x
$$

This terminology is the same as for the inner product of vectors because the function ( $\cdot, \cdot$ ) defined in (3) satisfies the same properties as the inner product of vectors (see Exercise 21). We will assume that the functions are real-valued and nice enough that all integrals of the form (3) exist. This is for example the case, if the functions are piecewise continuous.

$$
\begin{aligned}
& \text { The functions } f \text { and } g \text { are called orthogonal on the interval }(a, b) \text { if } \\
& \qquad(f, g)=\int_{a}^{b} f(x) g(x) d x=0
\end{aligned}
$$

We define the norm of $f$, denoted $\|f\|$, by

$$
\|f\|=\sqrt{(f, f)}=\left(\int_{a}^{b}|f(x)|^{2} d x\right)^{1 / 2}
$$

If $\|f\|<\infty$, we also say that $f$ is square integrable on $(a, b)$. If $f$ is real-valued, then $|f(x)|^{2}$ is simply $f^{2}(x)$. But if $f$ is complex-valued, then $|f(x)|^{2}=f(x) \overline{f(x)}$. Note how both definitions, orthogonality and norm, are based on the notion of inner products as they were in the finite-dimensional case. (Compare with (2).) A set of functions $\left\{f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}, \ldots\right\}$ defined on the interval ( $a, b$ ) is called an orthogonal set if $\left\|f_{n}\right\| \neq 0$ for all $n$, and each distinct pair of functions from the set is orthogonal, that is, $\left(f_{n}, f_{m}\right)=$ 0 for $n \neq m$. If, in addition, the norm of each $f_{n}$ is 1 , the set is called an orthonormal set. Hence, if we divide each function in an orthogonal set by its norm we obtain an orthonormal set.

## EXAMPLE 1 Orthogonal functions

Show that the set of functions $f_{n}(x)=\sin n x(n=1,2, \ldots)$ is orthogonal on the interval $[-\pi, \pi]$ and obtain the corresponding orthonormal set.
Solution We need to show that $\|\sin n x\| \neq 0$ and each distinct pair of functions in the given set is orthogonal. We have

$$
\|\sin n x\|^{2}=\int_{-\pi}^{\pi} \sin ^{2} n x d x=\int_{-\pi}^{\pi} \frac{1-\cos 2 n x}{2} d x=\pi
$$

Thus the norm of $\sin n x$ is $\|\sin n x\|=\sqrt{\pi} \neq 0$. For $m \neq n$ we have

$$
\int_{-\pi}^{\pi} \sin m x \sin n x d x=\frac{1}{2} \int_{-\pi}^{\pi}[\cos (m-n) x-\cos (m+n) x] d x=0
$$

To obtain an orthonormal set we divide each function by its norm, thus obtaining functions of norm 1. The corresponding orthonormal set is

$$
\frac{\sin x}{\sqrt{\pi}}, \frac{\sin 2 x}{\sqrt{\pi}}, \frac{\sin 3 x}{\sqrt{\pi}}, \ldots
$$

The next example deals with the trigonometric system from Fourier series. Note that this set has the set from Example 1 as a subset.

## EXAMPLE 2 The trigonometric system

The set of functions

$$
1, \sin x, \cos x, \sin 2 x, \cos 2 x, \sin 3 x, \cos 3 x, \ldots
$$

is orthogonal on the interval $[-\pi, \pi]$ (see Section 2.1). To obtain the corresponding orthonormal set, we compute $\|\cos n x\|=\|\sin n x\|=\sqrt{\pi} \neq 0$, for $n=1,2, \ldots$. Also, the norm of the function identically 1 over the interval $[-\pi, \pi]$ is equal to $\sqrt{2 \pi}$. Thus the orthonormal set is

$$
\frac{1}{\sqrt{2 \pi}}, \frac{\sin x}{\sqrt{\pi}}, \frac{\cos x}{\sqrt{\pi}}, \frac{\sin 2 x}{\sqrt{\pi}}, \frac{\cos 2 x}{\sqrt{\pi}}, \frac{\sin 3 x}{\sqrt{\pi}}, \frac{\cos 3 x}{\sqrt{\pi}}, \ldots
$$

## EXAMPLE 3 Legendre polynomials

It was shown in Section 5.6 that the Legendre polynomials satisfy

$$
\int_{-1}^{1} P_{n}^{2}(x) d x=\frac{2}{2 n+1} \quad \text { and } \quad \int_{-1}^{1} P_{m}(x) P_{n}(x) d x=0 \quad \text { for } m \neq n
$$

Thus the Legendre polynomials form an orthogonal set on $[-1,1]$.

## Generalized Fourier Series

Let $A$ be a class of functions on ( $a, b$ ). For example, $A$ could be the class of all continuous functions on $(a, b)$; or $A$ could be the class of all piecewise smooth functions; or $A$ could be the class of all square integrable functions $f$ on ( $a, b$ ). Suppose $f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}, \ldots$ is an orthogonal set of functions in $A$. As in the finite-dimensional case, the following questions arise:

1. Do the functions $f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}, \ldots$ generate $A$ ? That is, given a function $f$ in $A$, is it possible to express $f$ as a series of the form

$$
f(x)=\sum_{j=1}^{\infty} a_{j} f_{j}(x)
$$

where the $a_{j}$ 's are real or complex numbers?
2. If the representation (4) is possible, how do we find the coefficients $a_{j}$ ?

A complete treatment of these questions requires machinery that is beyond the scope of this text. Without going far into the theory of orthogonal functions, we will try to motivate the answers to these fundamental questions
through examples. Starting with the second question, and taking a hint from (1), our guess is that the coefficients in (4) should be given in terms of the inner products of $f$ with $f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}, \ldots$. To see this, we proceed as we have done before with Fourier series. We multiply both sides of (4) by $f_{k}$ and integrate term by term on the interval $(a, b)$. This gives

$$
\int_{a}^{b} f(x) f_{k}(x) d x=\sum_{j=1}^{\infty} a_{j} \int_{a}^{b} f_{j}(x) f_{k}(x) d x
$$

Because of orthogonality, the $k$ th term is the only nonzero term on the right side and so

$$
\int_{a}^{b} f(x) f_{k}(x) d x=a_{k} \int_{a}^{b} f_{k}^{2}(x) d x
$$

The left side is the inner product of $f$ and $f_{k}$, and the integral on the right side is the square of the norm of $f_{k}$, so $\left(f, f_{k}\right)=a_{k}\left\|f_{k}\right\|^{2}$. Thus

$$
a_{k}=\frac{\left(f, f_{k}\right)}{\left\|f_{k}\right\|^{2}}=\frac{1}{\left\|f_{k}\right\|^{2}} \int_{a}^{b} f(x) f_{k}(x) d x
$$

This motivates the following answer to the second question.

THEOREM 1 GENERALIZED FOURIER SERIES

If $f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}, \ldots$ is a set of orthogonal functions on $(a, b)$ and if $f$ can be represented as a series in the form (4), then

$$
f(x)=\sum_{j=1}^{\infty} \frac{\left(f, f_{j}\right)}{\left\|f_{j}\right\|^{2}} f_{j}(x)
$$

The series (6) is called a generalized Fourier series. Examples of such series include Fourier, Legendre, and Bessel series of the previous chapters.

We now turn to the first question. Again, we take a hint from the three-dimensional real vector space. For the classes of functions that we will consider in this book, a set of orthogonal functions $f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}, \ldots$ in $A$ generates $A$ if and only if the the orthogonal functions $f_{1} ; f_{2}, f_{3}, \ldots$ form a complete set of function in the following sense: If $f$ is orthogonal to every $f_{j}, j=1,2,3, \ldots$, then $f$ must be identically 0 .

In the case of Fourier series on the interval $[-\pi, \pi]$, the functions $1, \cos x$, $\cos 2 x, \cos 3 x, \ldots, \cos n x, \ldots, \sin x, \sin 2 x, \sin 3 x, \ldots, \sin n x, \ldots$ form an orthogonal set of functions on $[-\pi, \pi]$. By the Fourier series representation theorem, this set also generates the class $A$ of $2 \pi$-periodic, piecewise smooth functions. What does completeness mean in this case? It means that if all the Fourier coefficients of a function $f$ are zero, then $f$ must be identically zero. This fact follows from the Fourier series representation theorem, since

ORTHOGONALITY WITH RESPECT TO A WEIGHT
if we set all the coefficients of $f$ equal to 0 , then the Fourier series of $f$ is identically 0 . But the Fourier series converges to $f$, and so $f$ must be zero.

To establish the completeness of a set of functions is difficult in general. The good news is that most orthogonal sets of functions that we will encounter arise from solutions of ordinary differential equations that fit the so-called Sturm-Liouville theory form. The completeness property of these sets of functions is a consequence of general results from the Sturm-Liouville theory. (See Theorem 3, Section 14.2.)

## Orthogonality with Respect to a Weight

What we have presented thus far can be extended to functions that are orthogonal with respect to a weight function. We have encountered such situations in the study of Bessel series. In general, if $f$ and $g$ are real-valued functions on $(a, b)$, we define their inner product with respect to the weight $\boldsymbol{w}$ to be the number

$$
(f, g)=\int_{a}^{b} f(x) g(x) w(x) d x
$$

We assume that $w(x)$ is a nonnegative piecewise continuous function on $[a, b]$ that is not identically 0 on any subinterval of $[a, b]$. The corresponding definition of orthogonality is as follows.

The functions $f$ and $g$ are orthogonal with respect to the weight function $w$ on the interval $[a, b]$ if

$$
\int_{a}^{b} f(x) g(x) w(x) d x=0
$$

The norm of $f$ with respect to the weight function $w$ is

$$
\|f\|=\left(\int_{a}^{b}|f(x)|^{2} w(x) d x\right)^{1 / 2}
$$

## EXAMPLE 4 Orthogonality with respect to a weight

(a) The functions $f_{n}(x)=\cos n x(n=1,2, \ldots)$ satisfy $\int_{-\pi}^{\pi} f_{m}(x) f_{n}(x) d x=0$ for $m \neq n$. So these functions form an orthogonal set with weight function $w(x)=1$ on the interval $(-\pi, \pi)$.
(b) Let $\alpha_{1}, \alpha_{2}, \alpha_{3}, \ldots$ denote the positive zeros of the Bessel function $J_{0}$. From Theorem 1, Section 4.8, we have $\int_{0}^{1} J_{0}\left(\alpha_{m} x\right) J_{0}\left(\alpha_{n} x\right) x d x=0$ for $m \neq n$. Thus the functions $J_{0}\left(\alpha_{n} x\right), n=1,2, \ldots$ form an orthogonal set with respect to the weight function $w(x)=x$ on the interval $(0,1)$.

The following is the analog of Theorem 1 for expansions in series with respect to functions that are orthogonal with respect to a weight.

THEOREM 2 GENERALIZED FOURIER SERIES

Although (8) looks identical to (6), you should keep in mind that computing the inner products and norms in (8) involves a weight function.

If $f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}, \ldots$ is a set of orthogonal functions with respect to the weight $w$ on $[a, b]$ and if $f$ can be represented as a series in the form (4), then

$$
f(x)=\sum_{j=1}^{\infty} \frac{\left(f, f_{j}\right)}{\left\|f_{j}\right\|^{2}} f_{j}(x)
$$

In Example 4(b) we observed that the functions $J_{0}\left(\alpha_{n} x\right)$ are orthogonal with weight $w(x)=x$ on the interval $(0,1)$. In Example 1 of Section 4.8 we derived the series expansion of the function $f(x)=1$ in terms of this orthogonal series. You should check that the series obtained there is the same as that in (8).

We end this section with a statement of Parseval's identity for complete orthogonal systems.

THEOREM 3 PARSEVAL'S IDENTITY

Let $f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}, \ldots$ be a complete set of orthogonal functions with respect to the weight $w$ on $[a, b]$ and let $f$ be such that its norm as given by (7) is finite. (That is, $f$ is square integrable with respect to the weight $w$.) Then

$$
\int_{a}^{b}|f(x)|^{2} w(x) d x=\sum_{j=1}^{\infty} \frac{\left|\left(f, f_{j}\right)\right|^{2}}{\left\|f_{j}\right\|^{2}}
$$

As we have seen in Section 2.5 with Fourier series, Parseval's identity has many important applications. We can motivate it as follows. Since the functions $f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}, \ldots$ form a complete orthogonal set of functions with respect to the weight $w$ on $[a, b]$, the function $f$ can be represented in a generalized series as in (8). If $f$ is real-valued, multiply both sides of (8) by $f(x) w(x)$, and integrate over the interval $[a, b]$. Assuming that we can integrate the series term by term and using the definition of the inner product with respect to the weight $w$, we get (9). If $f$ is complex-valued, we multiply both sides of (8) by $\overline{f(x)} w(x)$ and repeat the same proof.

## Exercises 6.1

In Exercises 1-8, show that the given set of functions is orthogonal with respect to the given weight on the prescribed interval.

1. $1, \sin \pi x, \cos \pi x, \sin 2 \pi x, \cos 2 \pi x, \sin 3 \pi x, \cos 3 \pi x, \ldots ; w(x)=1$ on $[0,2]$.
2. $f(x)$ is an even function, $g(x)$ is an odd function; $w(x)=1$ on any symmetric interval about 0 .
3. $1, x,-1+2 x^{2} ; w(x)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{1-x^{2}}}$ on $[-1,1]$. (These are examples of Chebyshev polynomials of the first kind. See Exercises 6.2 for further details.)
4. $-3 x+4 x^{3}, 1-8 x^{2}+8 x^{4} ; w(x)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{1-x^{2}}}$ on $[-1,1]$.
5. $1,2 x,-1+4 x^{2} ; w(x)=\sqrt{1-x^{2}}$ on $[-1,1]$. (These are examples of Chebyshev polynomials of the second kind.)
6. $1,1-x,\left(2-4 x+x^{2}\right) / 2 ; w(x)=e^{-x}$ on $[0, \infty)$. (These are examples of Laguerre polynomials.)
7. $1,2 x,-2+4 x^{2} ; w(x)=e^{-x^{2}}$ on $(-\infty, \infty)$. (These are examples of Hermite polynomials. [Hint: Exercise 33 (a), Section 4.7.]
8. $\left(2-4 x+x^{2}\right) / 2,-12 x+8 x^{3} ; w(x)=e^{-x}$ on $[0, \infty)$.
9. Determine the constants $a$ and $b$ so that the functions $1, x$, and $a+b x+x^{2}$ become orthogonal on the interval $[-1,1]$.
10. If the functions $f(x)$ and $g(x)$ are orthogonal with respect to a weight $w(x)$ on $[0, L]$, what can be said about the functions $f(a x)$ and $g(a x)$ where $a>0$ ?
11. Compute the norms of the functions in Exercise 1.
12. Compute the norms of the functions in Exercise 5.
13. What is the orthonormal set corresponding to the Legendre polynomials on the interval $[-1,1]$ ?
14. Show that if $f$ and $g$ are continuous functions on $[a, b]$ that are orthogonal with respect to the weight function 1 , then either $f$ or $g$ must vanish somewhere in $(a, b)$.
15. Show that if $f_{1}(x), f_{2}(x), \ldots$ are orthogonal on $[0,1]$ with respect to the weight $x$, then $f_{1}(\sqrt{x}), f_{2}(\sqrt{x}), \ldots$ are orthogonal on $[0,1]$ with respect to the weight function 1.
16. Parseval's identity for Fourier series. Specialize (9) to the trigonometric system (of period $2 p$ ) to obtain (6) of Section 2.5.
17. Parseval's identity for Legendre series. Use (9) to derive the identity

$$
\int_{-1}^{1} f(x)^{2} d x=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{2 A_{n}^{2}}{2 n+1}
$$

where $A_{n}$ is the $n$th Legendre coefficient of $f$. (See Section 5.6.)
18. Parseval's identity for Bessel series. Use (9) to derive the identity

$$
\int_{0}^{R} f(x)^{2} x d x=\sum_{j=1}^{\infty} \frac{R^{2} J_{p+1}^{2}\left(\alpha_{p j}\right)}{2} A_{j}^{2}
$$

where $A_{j}$ is the $j$ th coefficient of the Bessel series expansion of $f$ of order $p$, and $\alpha_{p j}$ is the $j$ th positive zero of $J_{p}$. (See Section 4.8.)
19. Sums of reciprocals of squares of zeros of Bessel functions. Derive the following interesting formula: $\frac{1}{4(p+1)}=\sum_{j=1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{\alpha_{p j}^{2}}$. [Hint: Apply Exercise 18 with $R=1$ to the Bessel series expansion found in Exercise 20, Section 4.8.]
20. By specializing Exercise 19 to the case $p=\frac{1}{2}$, derive the identity

$$
\frac{\pi^{2}}{6}=\sum_{j=1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{j^{2}}
$$

21. Show that the inner product satisfies the following properties:
(a) $(a f, g)=a(f, g)$ for any number $a$,
(b) $(f+g, h)=(f, h)+(g, h)$,
(c) $(f, f) \geq 0$ for any function $f$.
